Data Analysis description

We analyzed electroencephalographic (EEG ) recordings from patients that had suffered a stroke as well as recordings from control, healthy subjects. The stroke patients were part of a more general study of stroke, currently under way at the Neurological Clinic of the University of Padova.  The ultimate goal of the analysis is to find patterns in the neural dynamics of stroke in order to help understanding the effect and spatial propagation of the neurological damage caused by stroke. Such dynamical changes may have practical implications, such as helping the recovery of patients through assisted pulse magnetic stimulation.

The analysis was performed at the sensor EEG level, although source reconstruction was also performed (for future analysis). The signals used were previously cleaned in such a way that artifacts were not present (the conventional EEG analysis procedures were applied, such as filtering and finding independent components to clean ocular and muscle artifacts). 

Subsequently, the EEG traces were filtered in different frequency bands. Such bands covered the main brain rhythms, starting from delta (starting at 0.4 Hz) to gamma (up to 50 Hz) rhythms. The central idea is that traveling waves may be present at specific frequencies in the brain, both during stroke and in normal subjects. To identify a traveling wave at a specific frequency, topographic maps of brain activity were calculated at the scalp level. The maximal values in such maps were found and tracked across time, in such a way as to find the temporal evolution of possible traveling waves maxima (or minima). The velocity of such waves was calculated. The dispersion relation (phase velocity versus frequency) of the traveling waves was found, showing a striking difference between waves in stroke patients and healthy subjects. Indeed, it was found that the velocity of traveling waves is much higher in stroke patients than in controls. Furthermore, there is a flat region in the dispersion relation for healthy subjects, indicating that traveling waves have velocities that are independent of frequency across several frequency bands. 
